# scran.js news

## 0.6.1

**New**

- Added `cloneArrayCollection()` to clone an array collection.
- Added `splitArray()` to split an array based on a factor.
- Added `realizeFile()` to prepare a file for reading into other functions, regardless of whether the call is in a Node.js or browser context.
  For browsers, this creates a file on the virtual file system; for Node.js, it either uses the supplied path or it creates a temporary file.
- Added `extractHdf5MatrixDetails()` to preview the format and dimensions of a HDF5-based matrix.

**Changes**

- Renamed `quickSliceArray()` to `sliceArray()` with a more sensible argument order.
  Soft-deprecated the former.
- Renamed `writeFile()`, `removeFile()`, `readFile()` and `fileExists()` to `writeVirtualFile()`, `removeVirtualFile()`, `readVirtualFile()` and `existsVirtualFile()`.
  Soft-deprecated the former set of functions.

## 0.6.0

**New**

- Support parsing and inspection data in RDS files (generated by R's `saveRDS()` function) via the new `readRds()` function.
- Added the `initializeSparseMatrixFromRds()` function, which does exactly as advertised.

## 0.5.1

**Changes**

- Updated the underlying C++ libraries to their latest versions.
  This should improve memory efficiency.

## 0.5.0

**New**

- HDF5 handles now support reading and writing of attributes via `readAttribute()` and `writeAttribute()` methods.
  An extra `attributes` member is available for listing the available attributes. 
- ScranMatrix objects can be used in more delayed operations via the new `delayedArithmetic()`, `delayedMath()`, `rbind()` and `transpose()` functions.
  All of these operations can be performed in place or can generate a new ScranMatrix.
- Subsetting of a ScranMatrix via `subsetRows()` or `subsetColumns()` can now be done in place with the new `inPlace=` option.
- Added a `quickSliceArray()` function to slice a (Typed)Array while preserving its type.

**Changes**

- The `initializeSparseMatrix*()` functions now return an object with a `row_ids=` array.
  This makes it more explicit that a reorganization of the row identities was performed.
- The `identities()` and `isReorganized()` methods for a ScranMatrix have been soft-deprecated; the latter will now always return `false`.
  This simplifies downstream operations, which no longer need to preserve consistency in the identities to produce a valid ScranMatrix.
- `updateRowIdentities()` now requires a row identity vector instead of a ScranMatrix in its first argument.
- `matchVectorToRowIdentities()` has been removed, along with other deprecated functions based on manipulation of row identities.

## 0.4.2

**New**

- Added a `maximumThreads()` function to query the maximum number of threads specified at module initialization.
- All parallelizable functions now accept a `numberOfThreads=` option to control the number of threads.

## 0.4.1

**New**

- Added a `layered=` option in various `initializeSparseMatrix*()` functions.
  This enables direct loading of sparse matrices without row reorganization, for simplicity at the cost of memory efficiency.

## 0.4.0

**New**

- Added the `extractMatrixMarketDimensions()` function to easily get dimensions without loading the entire file.

**Changes**

- Renamed the MatrixMarket reader to `initializeSparseMatrixFromMatrixMarket()`.
  This function now supports file path inputs, which avoids the need to buffer the entire file in Node.js.
- Functions that accept an optional `buffer =` argument will now return it directly if `buffer` is non-`null` and the output type is a WasmArray.
  Otherwise, if the output type is a TypedArray, functions will now return a TypedArray view on a non-null input `buffer`.
  This aims to provide some kind of sensible output value rather than just `undefined`.

## 0.3.0

**New**

- Exported the `free()` function as a replacement for `safeFree()`.
- Added the `subsetBlock()` function for general subsetting of the blocking factor.
- Added a `allowZeros=` option to gracefully handle size factors of zero in `logNormCounts()`.

**Changes**

- Renamed some classes for consistency with the `*Results` naming scheme.
- All `*Results` and `*Matrix` instances will automatically free their memory upon garbage collection if `free()` has not already been called.
- `subsetArrayCollection()` will now check for correct array length before subsetting.

## 0.2.5

**New**

- Exported the `safeFree()` function for fail-safe freeing of **scran.js** objects.
- Added a `listMito()` function to list mitochondrial genes in mouse or human.
- Added a `validateArrayCollection()` function to validate equilength array collections.
- `subsetArrayCollection()` can now be used to subset based on a filtering vector.

**Changes**

- Functions involving the **scran.js** virtual filesystem (e.g., `writeFile()`) now throw errors when attempted in a Node context.
- The setting of `localFile=` in `initialize()` is ignored outside of a Node context.
- `combineArrayCollections()` will attempt to preserve TypedArray types across input collections.

## 0.2.4

**New**

- Added a MultiMatrix class to handle memory management in multi-modal scenarios. 

**Changes**

- `subsetRows()` can now directly return a MultiMatrix.

## 0.2.3

**Changes**

- Updated **libscran** dependency for `scoreMarkers()` bugfix when group and block are confounded.

## 0.2.2

**Changes**

- `blockMethod: "block"` has been renamed to `blockMethod: "regress"` in `runPCA()`, for clarity.
- More checks for valid `blockMethod=` being passed to `runPCA()`.

## 0.2.1

**New**

- Exposed a reference policy option in `mnnCorrect()` for choosing the reference batch.
- Support more community detection methods in `clusterSNNGraph()`.

**Changes**

- Any attempt to save `null`s via the HDF5 writers will now raise an error.
- Any attempt to save non-strings as strings in the HDF5 writers will raise an error.

## 0.2.0

**New**

- Added `scaleByNeighbors()` for combining embeddings across multiple modalities.
- Added `computePerCellAdtQcMetrics()` and `computePerCellAdtQcFilters()` for quality control on the ADT count matrix.
- Added `quickAdtSizeFactors()` to support normalization of ADT counts.
- Added `splitRows()` to split a ScranMatrix along its rows.
- Added `subsetArrayCollection()`, `splitArrayCollection()` and `combineArrayCollections()` for working with collections of parallel arrays.
- Added `createBlock()`, `convertBlock()`, `filterBlock()` and `dropUnusedBlock()` for creating and manipulating the blocking factor.

**Changes**

- `runPCA()` will automatically adjust the number of requested PCs to be no greater than the number of available PCs.
- Added a `numberOfDims()` method to retrieve the number of dimensions from a NeighborIndex object.
- `computePerCellQcMetrics()` now accepts an array of Uint8WasmArrays in `subsets=` rather than a single concatenated array.

## 0.1.1

**Changes**

- Deprecated `ScranMatrix::isPermuted()` for `ScranMatrix::isReorganized()`.
- Deprecated `permuteVector()` for `matchVectorToRowIdentities()`.
- Deprecated `updatePermutation()` for `updateRowIdentities()`.
- Deprecated `permuteFeatures()` for `matchFeatureAnnotationToRowIdentities()`.

## 0.1.0

- Switched to `identities()` to keep track of the identities of the rows in the in-memory `ScranMatrix`.
This is an improvement over `permutation()` as the `identities()` can naturally accommodate subsetting.

## Pre-0.1.0

First series of releases.
Didn't keep track of all the changes here, so let's just treat these releases as prehistory.
Check out the commit history for more details.
